A GUIDE TO PETERBOROUGH CATHEDRAL.


CHAPTER I.

_From the foundation of the monastery by Peada, A.D. 655, to its
destruction by fire in the reign of Henry the First;--embracing a
period of 461 years._


The history of our monastic establishments is but little regarded and
as little known. The obscurity in which all monastic institutions is
involved renders it difficult to give any certain and positive
information respecting the origin of the building to whose history
these pages are devoted; but it appears to have been founded at a very
early period--the churches of Canterbury, Rochester, London, Westminster,
York, and Winchester, being the only large sacred edifices that
preceded it. The date of the first building is stated to have been A.D.
655--fifty-eight years after the introduction of Christianity into
England by St. Augustine; and so large were the foundation stones, that
it required eight yoke of oxen to draw them. From this it may be
inferred that the structure was not, like many of the Anglo-Saxon
churches of this period--built entirely of wood; though it was probably
far inferior in size and style of architecture to the building which
succeeded it.

It was one of the kings of Mercia who laid the foundation of the
monastery of _Medeshamstede_[1] in 655; his name was Peada, the eldest
son of Penda, the fourth monarch of that kingdom. The facts are thus
related by the Saxon chronicler:--"From the beginning of the world had
now elapsed 5,850 winters, when Peada the son of Penda assumed the
government of the Mercians. In his time came together himself and
Osway, brother of King Oswald, and said they would rear a _minster_ to
the glory of Christ and honour of Saint Peter; and they did so, and
gave it the name of _Medeshamstede_, because there is a well there
called _Medeswell_. And they began the ground-wall and wrought thereon,
after which they committed the work to a monk, whose name was Saxulf.
Peada reigned no while, for he was betrayed by his own queen in
Eastertide, 658."

Wolfere was the youngest son of Penda, and when Peada died, King Osway
assumed the government of Mercia, and ruled very despotically for about
three years, when the nobles, incensed at his conduct, rebelled against
him, drove him from the kingdom, and chose Wolfere for their king. It
was in his reign that "_Medeshamstede_ waxed rich," for Wolfere not
only caused the monastery to be built, but he endowed it with a great
number of lands, and made it "not subject except to Rome alone;" and
the abbey, which was by this time completed, was dedicated with great
pomp and ceremony to "Christ and St. Peter," and hallowed in the name
of "Saint Peter and Saint Andrew."

Saxulf, who had superintended the building of the abbey, was the first
abbot whose name is mentioned in the monkish chronicles as its ruler.
He was remarkable for his learning, piety, and humility, and was
chiefly instrumental in bringing Christianity into the kingdom of
Mercia. Both Saxulf and Cuthbaldus who succeeded him were abbots of the
monastery during the rule of Wolfere, although there is little mention
made of either in the records which have been handed down to us.

Wolfere died in 683, and was succeeded by his brother Ethelred, who
contributed very largely to the monastery, and secured to it by his
interest extraordinary privileges. Those who could not afford to go to
Rome to offer up vows and get absolved from their sins were allowed
both indulgences at this monastery, and could likewise receive "the
apostolical benediction." Ethelred built a house for the abbot, which
is now the palace of the bishop, but, excepting for its antiquity, it
possesses no features of interest.

After a reign of thirty years, Ethelred exchanged the insignia of
royalty for the rough garments of a monk, and became abbot of Bardney,
in Lincolnshire, where he died, in the year, 716.

From the death of Cuthbaldus to the accession of Beonna in 775, there
is a blank in the history of the monastery. During his rule one or two
important concessions were made to the monks by King Offa.

The name of the next abbot was Celredus, but of him nothing particular
is recorded. He was succeeded by Hedda, in 833, during whose abbacy the
first destruction of the monastery by the Danes occurred, which founded
an important era in the history of this institution. A band of savage
Danes, headed by Earl Hubba, invaded the territory of the Mercians, and
after committing numerous depredations in the country, they plundered
the monastery of Croyland, and proceeded to attack _Medeshamstede_.
The monks of this abbey had, however, gained intelligence of their
intentions, and having closed the gates, resolved to act on the
defensive. Hubba and his desperadoes soon surrounded them, and demanded
that the gates should be opened; and when he was told that he should
not enter, he commenced to batter the walls. In the course of the
attack, one of the monks hurled a great stone from the top of the
building upon the besiegers, and Tulba, the brother of Hubba, was
killed by it. This so incensed the earl, that he vowed to put every
monk to death by his own hand; and having forced the gates, proceeded
to put his horrible threat into execution,--robbed the monastery of
everything that was valuable, and then set it on fire. It burned
fifteen days. All the portable valuables were then packed on waggons
and taken away. The plunder, however, is said to have been lost,
"either in the Nen or in the neighbouring marshes."[2] This was in 870.

In a short time a few monks who escaped at Croyland re-assembled at
their abbey there, and after electing Godric their abbot, proceeded to
_Medeshamstede_, and buried the monks of that monastery who had been
murdered by the Danish invaders in one vast tomb. Godric likewise had
their effigies cut out in stone (a representation of which is here
shown, the original being in the Lady Chapel),[3] and, to honour their
memory, he went every year to weep over the grave in which he had laid
his brethren.

From this time until the reign of Alfred the Great [872] the monastery
of _Medeshamstede_ was frequently invaded, and the lands which
belonged to it were seized by the conquerors. It was left for the
wisdom and courage of Alfred to restore that tranquility to England
which it had so long lost, and to give protection and security to his
subjects. The Danes who had committed so many depredations before his
accession to the throne were now beaten back and finally checked by the
powerful fleet which he built to protect the kingdom from invasion.
King Edgar, who succeeded Alfred, followed his example in this respect,
and kept up the strength of the fleet. By this means increased security
was given to England, and the people, comparatively happy in their
internal government, and freed from the fear of foreign interruption,
began to improve their public buildings and religious houses.

It was in 966 that the monastery of _Medeshamstede_ was rebuilt after
the old model, at the instigation of Athelwold, who was at that time
Bishop of Winchester. King Edgar assisted in the re-construction of the
monastery; and so important did he consider religion to be in the
amelioration of the morals of his subjects, that he is said to have
rebuilt upwards of forty religious establishments during his reign.

[Illustration: Ancient Monumental Stone in the Cathedral.]

After the abbey of _Medeshamstede_ was finished in 972, he ratified all
the former charters which it possessed, and gave it the name of Burgh.

The first abbot of the monastery, after its destruction, was called
Adulphus, formerly the king's chancellor; but having accidentally been
the cause of the death of his only son, he could no longer live happily
in the world, and he therefore endowed the abbey with all his wealth,
and was elected its first abbot.

The monastery of _Burgh_ was now in a more prosperous and wealthy
condition than ever; all the neighbouring country was subject to it,
and its possessions were so immense that its name was changed to
_Gildenburg_. Adulphus, wishing to increase the value of the estates of
the monastery and to encourage agriculture, had all the surrounding
forests cut down and the lands cultivated. He was afterwards made
Archbishop of York, [992,] and the eloquent Kenulfus succeeded him in
the reign of Ethelred. Kenulfus built a high wall round the monastery,
part of which is still in existence. He was translated to the see of
Winchester, in 1006, and was so celebrated for his virtue and learning,
that he gave a character to the monastery, and the monks were for a
long time afterwards considered the most enlightened and intelligent
men in the island.

Elsinus was the next abbot of whom we read in connection with the
monastery, and was remarkable for the number of relics which he had
collected. Gunton tells us that the arm of St. Oswald[4] was the most
famous, and Walter de Whittlesea informs us that King Stephen came to
_Peterburgh_ to witness the miracles which it is said to have
performed. During the abbacy of Elsinus, England was invaded by the
Danes under King Sweyn, in revenge of a massacre of his subjects by the
order of King Ethelred. They landed in the north, and, having gained
some advantages, proceeded southward to the fen country, which they
plundered and laid waste with fire and sword. Heavy fines were extorted
from the rich abbeys; that on Crowland amounting to ¡ê64,000 of the
present value of money. Elsinus died in 1055.

Arwinus was then elected abbot, but he resigned in 1067 to Leofric. He
was nephew to Earl Leofric, of Mercia, whose Countess, according to the
chroniclers, redeemed Coventry from toll by riding naked through the
streets of that town.

During the third year of this abbot, William the Conqueror invaded
England, and we are told that Leofric fought for some time in the
English army, but in consequence of ill health, was obliged "to return
to his monastery, where he died on the third of the kalends of
November, A.D. 1066." Braddo (or Brand) was the next successive abbot,
but died after a rule of three years.

Thorold of Fescamp, who for some service rendered to the conqueror, had
been appointed to an abbacy near Salisbury, was considered by William,
on account of his soldier-like qualities, to be a fit person to
transfer to the rebellious and disorderly neighbourhood of the Camp of
Refuge, and he was accordingly appointed Abbot of Peterborough, in
1069.

Between the death of Braddo and the arrival of his successor, the
second destruction of the monastery took place. A band of Danish
soldiers, headed by Hereward de Wake, nephew of Braddo, attacked the
monastery, and all the valuable treasures which it possessed were
either taken away or destroyed. They then set fire to the building. The
following is Gunton's account of the treasures which they captured;
and, as it puts us in possession of much curious information concerning
those times, we will give the extract entire:--"They took the golden
crown from the head of the crucifix, the cross with the precious
stones, and the footstool under; _duo aurea feretra_ (two golden or
gilded biers whereon they carried the saints' reliques, and other such
like things, in procession), and nine silver ones; and twelve crosses,
some of gold and some of silver. And, besides all this, they went up to
the tower and took away the great table which the monks had hidden
there, which was all of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and wont
to be before the altar, with abundance of books, and other precious
things, which were valuable, there being not the like in all England."

The monks were disconsolate at the loss of these valuable treasures,
and the abbot solicited William the King to interfere for them, in
order that they might be returned. It appears, however, that the
conqueror did not pay much attention to their request; and it is
probable that, as he had just after this depredation concluded a treaty
of peace with the Danish sovereign, he was unwilling to do anything
that should cause a breach of peace between them, especially as they
were such troublesome and dangerous enemies. The greater part of the
treasure was by some means once more restored to the monks,[5] and,
according to the Saxon chronicler, they commenced from this time to
build ramparts for their own protection, and for the security of the
monastery. Tout Hill[6] in the vineyard field was raised at this time,
and there is said to have been a subterraneous passage which ran thence
to Croyland and Thorney. This hill was originally called Mount Thorold.

After the arrival of Thorold at Peterborough, being accompanied by 160
well-armed Frenchmen, he proceeded to turn his attention to the Camp of
Refuge, situated near Ely; and, joining Ives of Taillebois in an
assault upon it, was repulsed by Hereward de Wake, and taken prisoner,
with many of the monks; nor was he liberated, according to Dean
Patrick, until he had paid three thousand marks. After his liberation,
he returned to the monastery, and made himself more odious to the monks
than before. He was depraved and dissolute, and, to satisfy his
licentious desires, he is said to have made free with the treasury. He
introduced two monks likewise into the monastery, who were foreigners,
and quite as unscrupulous as himself, in purloining the wealth of the
abbey. He was afterwards made a bishop in France, but owing to his
utter recklessness of conduct and morality, he was sent back to England
four days after: was again admitted abbot of the monastery of
_Peterburgh_, where he died in 1098, after an odious government of
twenty-eight years.

During the reign of Henry I., the son of the Conqueror, Ernulphus
became Abbot of _Peterburgh_. This event took place in the year 1107,
and he made several important improvements in the monastery; built a
new dormitory and refectory, and completed the chapter-house, which
had been left in an unfinished state for several years. He likewise
enriched the convent by making an arrangement with all who held in rent
the abbey lands to pay tithes to him, and, when they died, that they
should give the third part of their estates to be buried in the church.
Thus it was that the monastery continued to grow in wealth, and when
Ernulphus was made Bishop of Rochester, which happened in 1114, the
abbey was entitled to a tithe of 40,800 acres of land.

During the rule of his successor, John de Sais, the monastery was
burned down. The fire is said to have occurred accidentally, and such
was the violence of the flames, that they reached the village and
consumed most of the cottagers' houses. The additions which Ernulphus
had made to the abbey, however, are said to have escaped the general
ruin.


      [1] The most probable etymology of this word is that which is
      given by Britton in his History of Peterborough Cathedral,
      viz.--"_Mede_ or _Mead_, a meadow; _ham_, a sheltered habitation;
      and _sted, stead_, or _stad_, a bank, station, or place of rest."

      [2] In cleaning out the river, a little below the bridge, in
      June, 1820, a dagger was found, which is supposed to have
      belonged to these Danes. It is in the possession of the present
      Bishop.

      [3] At a meeting of the Arch?ological Society at Peterborough, in
      1861, Mr. Bloxam read a paper in which he denied the authenticity
      of this monument, which had previously been regarded as one of
      the oldest monumental stones extant. Mr. Bloxam regards it as a
      Norman, and not a Saxon work, and some centuries later in date
      than the massacre of the monks. He considers that the figures are
      not martyred monks with their abbot, but Christ and his eleven
      disciples. It has been further conjectured by Canon Westcott
      that it is part of the shrine erected over the relics of St.
      Kyneburgha, which were removed from Castor to Peterborough during
      the Abbacy of Elsinus, A.D. 1005-1055. A fragment of sculpture in
      the same style is built into the west wall of the South Transept.

      [4] A Saxon King of Northumbria and the second Christian monarch
      of that province. An interesting account of this prince, and of
      the extraordinary miracles said to have been performed by his
      remains after death, will be found in a larger edition of the
      Guide to the Cathedral, by Thos. Craddock, Esq. Price 2.6 & 15.

      [5] Britton says, on the authority of Gunton, that they sent the
      secretary of the monastery over to Denmark, on purpose to obtain
      it. It is, however, more probable that Hereward, knowing the
      disposition of the Norman abbot would lead him to enrich himself
      at the expense of the monastery, took this means of removing
      temptation out of the way of Thorold, and subsequently restored
      the treasure to the monastery, when there was no longer any
      danger of its being appropriated by the abbot.

      [6] Toot is an old Saxon word, signifying to stand out, or be
      prominent.




CHAPTER II.

_From the Foundation of the New Church, in 1117, to its dissolution
as an Abbey by Henry the Eighth, in 1541;--embracing a period of 425
years._


In the first chapter of our history, we traced the rise and progress of
the monastery of _Peterburgh_ through a period of 462 years, at the
expiration of which time we saw it burned to the ground, with all the
treasures which it had accumulated. We have now to witness its
restoration, and to follow it until we come to the nineteenth century,
through all the ravages which it has survived.

At the time of the eventful destruction which we have mentioned [1116],
John de Sais was abbot of the monastery, and had regained for it
several of the lands which had been forfeited by his predecessors. He
was, according to Gunton, a very learned man, and possessed great
strength of mind and decision of character. He showed his energy by the
prompt measures which he took to rebuild the abbey after its
destruction, and to get all those lands, manors, and fees confirmed to
it which it had so long enjoyed, and which continued daily to increase.
It was a very long time, however, before the new monastery was built.
John de Sais superintended it during his abbacy, but he lived only nine
years after he had laid the foundation-stone (which ceremony he
performed in the month of March, 1117), and the building was not
completed at his death; nor did he succeed in securing to the monastery
all its former possessions, although he exerted himself very
assiduously to obtain them.

John de Sais was succeeded by Henri de Angeli, in 1128, of whom nothing
of moment is recorded. He was a man of no character, and tried to
injure the monastery in the estimation of the king, by speaking falsely
of the brotherhood. Some writers say that he was detected in his
villany by the king, who obliged him to resign his chair, and leave the
country; others assert that he quitted England on account of other
crimes. All historians agree, however, that he was a very bad man.

The appointment of the next abbot devolved upon the king, and Martin de
Vecti was chosen by him to govern the monastery, in 1133. The monks
received him with every expression of respect, as he was reported to be
a man of profound erudition and good moral character. He began his rule
by forwarding the erection of the new monastery, and it was during his
abbacy that it was completed and re-dedicated--which latter ceremony
was conducted with great pomp, and all the abbots of the neighbouring
monasteries, with numbers of the barons and gentry, were present
[1140]. It appears that De Vecti was very zealous in the work of
improvement, and that he not only built a new gate to the monastery,
but formed a new village on the western side of it; altered the place
of wharfage, erected a new bridge, planted the present vineyard, and
built many new houses near the abbey. He is also said to have re-built
the parish church, then situate in St. John's close, in the precincts.
The destruction of the castle, which stood near this church, is
likewise attributed to this abbot. It is probable that it was situate
upon Mount Thorold, or Tout Hill, as it is now called. This hill may
yet be seen in a close on the north-western side of the cathedral.

De Vecti ruled twenty-two years, and died in 1155.

After the death of De Vecti, the monks resolved to maintain the right
which they possessed of choosing their own abbot, and William de
Waterville was elected by them to the government of the monastery:
their choice was afterwards ratified by the king. Waterville was
formerly a chaplain to Henry II., and having some influence with him,
he regained for his abbey "the eight hundreds of that part of the
country which had formerly been granted by the king's predecessors;"
and, being firmly established in the monastery, he turned his attention
to the improvement of the town. He founded a hospital for the sick in
Spitalfield; built St. Martin's church and St. Michael's nunnery, at
Stamford--besides settling a yearly sum upon the church of St. John
Baptist,[7] _Peterburgh_--covering the monastery with lead, and
founding the chapel of Thomas ¨¤ Becket.

It is stated by Gunton, that this chapel is in "the middle of the arch
of the church porch," but this is an error which it will be well to
correct. The present school-house near the minster gateway is found to
be the chancel of the chapel; and it is thus described by Kennel--"The
chapel of the blessed Thomas the Martyr, near the outer gate of the
abbey there."

After a government of 20 years, Waterville was deposed, at the
instigation of the monks, by the Archbishop of Canterbury. No positive
crime was alleged against him--at least the monks have not mentioned
any in their accounts of the monastery.

The next abbot of whom we read is Benedict, a man of great learning,
who was appointed to the rule of the monastery by the king in 1177,
after he had held it in his possession two years. The abbot brought
several relics to the monastery, and finished the chapel of Thomas ¨¤
Becket. He was very zealous likewise in his endeavours to re-obtain the
abbey lands which had been forfeited or seized during the rule of his
predecessors; nor was he scrupulous of the means which he took to
effect it: sometimes he took possession of them by force, and at others
he tried to conciliate the usurpers by large sums of money and fair
promises.

The monastery, during his government, underwent many important changes.
He rebuilt the whole body of the church, "from the lantern to the
porch;" and it is the opinion of Gunton, that the curiously painted
ceiling which covers the middle of the building was of his workmanship.
He likewise added several houses to those which were already within the
precincts of the abbey, and built the present gate which leads to the
west front of the cathedral, with a chapel over it, which was dedicated
to St. Nicholas.[8]

Benedict likewise obtained a charter for holding a fair upon the feast
of St. Peter, and a market to be held every Thursday. The fair was to
continue eight days.

This abbot ruled seventeen years, and died in 1194.

Andreas succeeded Benedict, and rose gradually from a monk to a prior,
and finally to an abbot. It is said that he was a good man, and secured
the esteem of the monks by giving them the lands of Fletton and
Alwalton to enrich their table. He ordered likewise six marks a year to
be given out of the monastery funds to the infirmary. This donation was
continued by his successors for a long time, but Abbot Walter, during
his rule, directed that it should be employed in purchasing wine for
the "pitanciary."

During the reign of Andreas there were several lands given to the
"Eleemossynary," and the monastery was very flourishing. He governed
seven years, and died in 1201. His body was entombed in the south
aisle, with two of his brethren, under a Norman arch, beneath which is
the following epitaph:--

    Hos tres abbates quibus est prior abba Iohannes,
    Alter Martinus, Andreas ultimus, unus
    Hic claudit tumulus; pro clausis ergo rogemus.

Acharius succeeded Andreas in 1200. He was originally a prior of St.
Albans, but was presented by King John to the abbacy of this monastery,
on account of his many virtues and distinguished talents. He seems to
have had the interest of the monastery at heart as greatly as any of
his predecessors, and was engaged in several lawsuits with different
landowners, in order to recover the lost possessions of the abbey. He
gained the marsh of Singlesholt from the Abbot of Crowland "for a
yearly acknowledgement of four stones of wax," and increased the number
of his monks. He endowed the church with many valuable articles--such
as silver basins for the great altar, with a case of gold and silver,
set with precious stones, for the arm of St. Oswald! He gave likewise
two large silver cups to the refectory, with silver feet richly gilt,
according to Gunton, and four table knives with ivory hafts. He paid
money off the monastery debts, and purchased houses in London, which he
added to the abbey possessions.

During the festival of St. Peter, a large wax candle, of five pounds
weight,[9] was set before the altar, and burnt day and night, until the
festival was completed. This custom was observed in all other feasts of
the saints in the abbey; and during the rule of Acharius the festivals
were remarkable for their pomp and splendour.

This abbot ruled ten years, died in 1214, and was succeeded by Robert
of Lindsay, or Lyndesheye.

It was during the rule of this abbot that one of the most interesting
changes was effected in the monastery: the windows until this time had
been "stuffed with straw," to keep out the cold and the rain; and, at
an immense expense, he had thirty-nine of them adorned with glass,
which enterprise gained for him a considerable amount of fame and
esteem. Not content with this change in his own monastery, he extended
his generosity to other parts, and built a chancel to the church at
Oxney. He was confirmed by the king at Winchester, and received the
benediction of the Bishop of Lincoln.

Being thus installed in his new office with so much honour, he directed
his attention to the forest lands by which he was surrounded. By virtue
of the forest laws, foresters let their cattle run at liberty to graze,
and they frequently did much damage to the possessions of the
monastery, and to the property of the town inhabitants. Lindsay
therefore wrote to the king to try to "disafforest" the lands which
were contiguous to the monastery, and he effected his object by payment
of 1320 marks. Of his other improvements we read that "he made in the
south cloister a lavatory of marble, for the monks to wash their hands
in when they went to meals--their hall being near on the other side of
the wall, the door leading into it being yet standing; the lavatory
continued entire until the year 1651, and then, with the whole
cloister, it was also pulled down."

About this time, in the reign of King John, England was the scene of
those civil contentions which terminated in favour of the barons, and
the attainment of a charter of liberties. A large number of the
monasteries in England were, however, despoiled by the king before the
fate of the war was decided, and amongst them was Crowland Abbey. It is
likely that of _Peterburgh_ escaped the fury of the king's soldiers,
for we do not read of any outrage being committed upon it at that time
in the monkish records. Lindsay wrote a history of the monastery,
according to Pitseus, but he did not enrich the church library with any
valuable additions. He ruled seven years, and died in 1222.

Alexander de Holderness was the successor of Lindsay, and was elected
November 30, 1222. He was called Holderness from the place where he was
born. This abbot made a number of improvements in his monastery, and
enriched it with money and relics. He built, says Gunton, "_the
solarium magnum_ at the door of the abbot's chamber, and a _cellerarium_
under it, and furnished the church also with that precious crystal
vessel wherein the blood of Thomas ¨¤ Becket was kept." He likewise
built halls at Oundle, Castor, Eyebury, and other places. He was much
beloved by the monks, and died, after a government of four years, in
1226.

An interesting incident in connexion with this abbot may here be
mentioned. On the 2nd of April, 1830, when the workmen were making a
foundation in the cathedral church for the erection of a new choir,
they discovered beneath one of the slabs a stone coffin, which their
curiosity led them to open. They were surprised to find that it
contained the body of a man, with a large coarse garment around it,
equipped with boots, and having a crosier by its side. There were
several very remarkable things connected with this discovery. The boots
were what are called "rights and lefts," and in a good state of
preservation. The crosier was perfect, and a part of the body was hard,
and of a copper-coloured hue, whilst the other part was decomposed. The
body was headless, and a piece of lead was found lying in _place of
the skull_, with this inscription upon it--

    ABBAS: ALEXANDR:

These remains were gathered together, replaced in the shell, and buried
in the south aisle, nearly opposite the burial place of Mary Queen of
Scots.

Martin de Ramsey was chosen abbot after the death of Alexander. His
election was sanctioned by the king, and he was confirmed by the Bishop
of Lincoln, at Westminster. There is nothing remarkable recorded of
this abbot. He "disafforested" several lands about _Peterburgh_, and
added them to the possessions of the monastery.

During the rule of this abbot, Pope Gregory IX. ordered that when there
should be an interdiction of the monastery lands, the monks should
close their doors, and not allow the people to hear their prayers, or
participate in them; but the privilege was granted to the monks of
Peterborough to say the service in a low voice to themselves, the
ringing of the bell being dispensed with.

Martin ruled six years, died in 1232, and was succeeded by Walter de
St. Edmond, in 1233. It was during the government of this abbot that
the monastery of _Peterburgh_ was re-dedicated and consecrated with
holy oil, by the Bishops of Lincoln and Exeter [1238], according to the
decrees of the constitution of Otto.[10] The ceremony was attended with
the usual pomp of such proceedings, and the possessions of the
monastery were ratified anew. Walter de Whittlesea gives a very
favourable account of the disposition of this abbot, and speaks very
highly of his benevolence to King Henry, who was reduced to the
necessity of seeking support from this and other monasteries. St.
Edmond entertained the king twice at _Peterburgh_, in company with the
queen and the young prince. He also "gave 60 marks towards the marriage
of Margaret, his daughter, with Alexander III., King of Scotland," and
increased the number of his monks to one hundred and ten. He made
likewise three several journeys to Rome upon civil and ecclesiastical
business. The cause of one of these journeys was this:--The Pope
(Gregory, 1241) sent messages to _Burgh_, demanding that the abbot
should give unto one of his favourites a certain yearly sum, or a
number of lands equal to that sum, and the abbot refused to do so
without the consent of the king who was patron of the monastery; and
going to Rome to know the cause of such an arbitrary demand, he was
reproved by the Pope in person, and treated with great indignity by the
cardinals, and expelled the court. The abbot was so much grieved, by
this cruel and ungenerous treatment that he never recovered, but died
in the same year [1245], after having ruled twelve years with the
greatest mildness, prudence, and benevolence. This story of the Pope's
arbitrary conduct calls forth a very pithy couplet from Gunton--

    "Rome gnaweth hands as dainty cates,
    And when it cannot gnaw--it hates."

Walter was a learned man, and increased the books of the library.
Gunton says "he was pious and merciful to all, exacted nothing unduly
of his tenants, whether rich or poor; but if any poor man or woman made
their necessities known to him, he would burst into tears, and take
compassion upon them."

The next abbot of whom we read is William de Hotot, who was elected on
the 6th of February, 1246. His rule was not favourable to the
monastery. He lavished the possessions of the church upon his friends
and kinsmen. His conduct was reprehended by the monks, and finally
represented to the Bishop of Lincoln, when William, fearing he should
be deposed, resigned his office, and retired upon an allowance from the
monastery in 1249, after governing three years.

Mr. Owen Davys, in his Guide to the Cathedral, remarks that "it is a
matter of great surprise that we have no record handed down to us of
the exact date when that magnificent appendage to the Cathedral, the
western front, was erected, though it must have been about this time.
The name of the architect under whose directions this original and
strikingly beautiful design was carried out is also buried in
obscurity. This noble front is almost entirely built in the style
usually known by the name of early English Gothic, of which it is,
perhaps, the finest example we have now left us.

"It would seem that scarcely any time elapsed between the building of
the western transepts of this monastic church and the commencement of
the west front, as the style of the western transepts is Late
Transition Norman, and in some places almost Early English, and that of
the west front pure Early English. Now, as the Transition Norman gave
place to the Early English in this country, about the commencement of
the thirteenth century, it would seem probable that these western
transepts were built at that time, probably during the government of
Acharius [1200]; these works being carried on by Robert de Lindsay, his
successor, might have been completed by him: the mixture of Early
English work with that of the former style in them may thus be
satisfactorily accounted for. It would seem, therefore, that these
transepts were erected before the time of Walter St. Edmonds, and that
the building of the west front probably followed immediately after the
erection of them. Mr. Britton, in his 'History and Antiquities of
Peterborough Cathedral,' page 56, refers the building of this
interesting feature of the church to the times of Acharius and Robert
de Lindsay. It would seem, however, that though it was probably begun
in the time of the latter abbot, it was not finished till the time of
John de Caleto, who came to the government of this abbey A.D. 1249. The
reason for this opinion is the similarity of some of its details to
those of the infirmary church, which was erected by this abbot. Some
beautiful portions of this church are still to be seen. This abbot is
said to have been a great builder; and it is probable that the
refectory and south cloister were rebuilt by him; and that the door by
which the Bishop usually enters the Cathedral, was inserted at the same
time. The Chapel of St. Lawrance, which stood at the east end of the
infirmary church, seems to have been erected about this time. There was
an entrance into this chapel, from the infirmary church, through an
arch, which is still standing, the chapel having been converted into a
prebendal house."

Richard de London was elected abbot in 1274. He had held several
offices in the monastery before his instalment, and being well
acquainted with the discipline of the church, he governed well and
wisely. He recovered the manor of Biggins, near Oundle, of the Earl of
Clare, and his success was mainly owing to the eloquence of one of his
monks, who pleaded the cause of the monastery in person, before the
judge of assize at Northampton.

It was during the government of Richard de London that Prior Parys
built and endowed the Lady Chapel.[11] This abbot ("when he was
sacrist") also built one of the largest steeples of the church, and
gave two bells to the monastery. He died in 1295, having ruled twenty
years. In his reign the library and the monastery lands were increased
considerably.

William de Woodford was next elected abbot. During the latter part of
the rule of Richard, he had assisted him in performing the duties of
abbot, which the latter was unable to do of himself, on account of his
great age.

Swapham informs us that whilst William was abbot, the Pope taxed all
the manors of the abbey.

Woodford is described as a fair and impartial man, of much kindness and
benevolence, who added to the provisions of the monks,--obtained a
charter for the possession of all the deer that might be slain on the
monastery lands, and devoted his attention to the better regulation of
the hospital of St. Leonard.[12] He died after a rule of four years, in
1299, and was succeeded by Godfrey de Croyland in the same year. This
abbot, on his installation, was presented by Prince Edward with a
silver cup, and had the confirmation fees returned to him by the
Bishop's order.

The service in the chapel of Thomas ¨¤ Becket was for a time suspended
during this abbot's rule, in consequence of a violation of the sanctity
of the place by certain officers, who, being in search of several men
that had transgressed against the laws, and hearing they had taken
shelter in the monastery, dragged them hence by force. The Bishop of
Lincoln therefore put his curse upon the place, nor was it without much
persuasion that he granted an absolution.

The same year, being 1300, says Gunton, "a marriage being intended
betwixt the heirs of Offord and Southorp, king Edward supposing himself
to be interested therein, appointed inquisition to be made whether the
disposal of that marriage belonged to him or the abbot of _Peterburgh_.
And it being upon the inquisition certified that those heirs and their
progenitors held their lands of the abbey of _Peterburgh_, the right of
disposal of those heirs did therefore belong to the abbot, which the
king, understanding, desisted." This right of disposal is well worthy
of notice, as it illustrates the spirit of the time better than a great
deal of writing.

Godfrey was remarkable for his generosity and sumptuous entertainments.
The king and queen, with all their retinues, were provided for at the
monastery, and once Prince Edward came with Peter Gaveston, and the
abbot presented them with two magnificent robes.[13]

Godfrey added many beautiful improvements to his monastery, and built
"the great gate-tower, over which was the chamber called the knights'
chamber," being the gateway leading to the Bishop's Palace. The walls
of this room were carved with knights and their coats of arms.

[Illustration: Peterborough Cathedral--Remains of Cloisters.]

Whilst Edward was preparing for war against Scotland, he sent five
successive times to this abbey for money to assist him in carrying on
his enterprise, and Godfrey gave him in all about ¡ê500. His other gifts
and entertainments were sumptuous and large, and the sum of money which
he expended during his abbacy was ¡ê3646 4s. 3d. This remarkable man
died in 1321, after a splendid rule of twenty-two years. The value of
the monastery possessions in his time, about _Peterborough_ alone,
was ¡ê621 16s. 3d; but this sum was but a small portion of the vast
property which then belonged to the church.

Adam de Boothby was the next abbot. He entertained the king, queen, and
royal household, in the year 1327, which cost him ¡ê327 15s. Prince
Edward, with his sisters and servants, were likewise hospitably treated
at this abbey during a stay of eight weeks. Like Godfrey, Boothby was a
generous man, but the expenses which the royal family cost him and his
predecessors must have been a heavy impost upon the monastery. He died
in 1338, in the eighteenth year of his rule.

Henry de Morcot was installed in February, 1338. There is nothing of
any moment recorded of him, except that he was engaged in successful
litigation with a baron for the recovery of some church lands. He died
in 1346, having ruled eight years.

"Henry being dead, was buried betwixt the quire and the great altar,
near unto his predecessor Adam. His grave being, in the year 1648,
opened to receive the body of John Towers, late head bishop of this
place, there was found a seal of lead (the instrument wholly consumed),
having on one side these letters thus inscribed:--'SPA SPE,' over their
several effigies; on the reverse--'CLEMENS P P VI.' (Gunton, p. 47-48).
It is probable that the instrument was some indulgence gotten at the
jubilee, which was but three years before."

Robert Ramsey succeeded to the abbacy in 1346, but of him nothing
particular is recorded.

Henry de Overton was Abbot in 1361, and was followed by Nicholas, who
was noted for his prudence and economy.

We now come to the rule of William Genge, who was elected in 1396, and
ruled twelve years. He was, according to Gunton the first abbot of this
monastery who was dignified with a mitre. In the supplement to Gunton's
history, it is stated "that they put on mitres in token they had
episcopal jurisdiction, and being advanced to the dignity of barons,
and to sit in parliament which no other abbots had done." During his
abbacy, the church which was then situate in St. John's close, in
Boongate, was taken down, and re-erected on its present site. The cause
of this removal was the fearful inundations to which, from its
proximity to the fens, it was exposed.

Between 1408 and 1438 the monastery was presided over by John Deeping.
During his abbacy great complaints were made of the conduct of the
Monks, and the heads of the Benedictine order were summoned before the
King at Westminster, to answer the charge of abuses, which they could
not deny, but promised to reform.

Richard Ashton was appointed abbot in 1438, and ruled 33 years. He made
many visits to the neighbouring monasteries, and likewise received many
from their abbots. He granted several corrodies to persons who endowed
his abbey. One to John Delaber, bishop of St. David's, is worthy of
notice.--This John had his choice, whether to remain at _Peterburgh_
for life, and receive a pension of ¡ê32 per annum, or retreat to the
abbot's manor at Eyebury[14] with the same advantages.

There was another corrody granted to Alice Garton, the widow of Thomas
Garton, who was a benefactor to the Cathedral, and whose name is
engraved on stone, in characters of an hieroglyphic kind, over the
large painted window at the west end of the building; it is well worth
examining. It was in the year 1439 that king Henry granted a charter
unto this abbot to hold a fair "for three days," commencing on St.
Matthew's day, (O.S.) in a field, (now named the Mending,) which joins
the counties of Huntingdon and Northampton together. This fair, on
account of its vicinity to the bridge, was called "Brigge Fair," by
which name it is still known. Ashton was called to parliament at
Westminster, but being too infirm to attend, he deputed William
Tresham, (probably one of his monks) to appear for him. He afterwards
took the oaths of allegiance to his sovereign, at Coventry. During his
rule it is stated that 33 monks died in the monastery, and many
festivals were suspended in consequence, there not being a sufficient
number left to perform the ceremonies. This abbot made several
additions to the church; and the building at the east end, according to
Britton, was commenced by him.

Mr. Davys is of opinion that, "though we read of no further additions
being made to the church between the time of Godfrey, (1299), and that
of abbot Ashton, much took place in this interval. Almost all the
windows of the church must have been transformed from their original
character into their present shapes, and those which escaped this
mutilation, as in the transepts and clerestory, were filled with their
present unsuitable tracery, about the conclusion of the fourteenth
century.

"The porch, or chapel, now used as the Chapter Library, standing within
the central arch of the West Front, was probably built soon after this
time. The reason why it was erected will be evident to any one who will
examine the front carefully; for it will be seen that the clustered
column, between the northern and middle arch, leans out to a very great
extent, and were it not for the support it receives from this chapel,
very serious consequences must ensue. The whole front also leans to the
westward, though not so much so as this column. This inclination is
evidently of very early date, and probably took place shortly after the
completion of the front. This chapel was therefore added as a support
to the front; its insertion is, nevertheless, much to be regretted, as
it materially diminishes the beauty of the finest part of the
Cathedral.

"Many alterations, and additions, seems to have taken place in this
abbey, during the time when the decorated style was prevalent in
England; and consequently between the time when the Infirmary Church
was built, and the last-mentioned structure was erected, at the west
end of the church. Of these may be mentioned, the two elegant spires on
the north and south towers of the West Front, and the great south-west
tower of the church, which has since been materially diminished in
height. The present Chapter School, which was originally the chancel of
Thomas ¨¤ Becket's Chapel, was also built at this period; its nave was
taken down in the time of Abbot Genge, who presided here between the
years 1396 and 1408, and the materials were given to the inhabitants of
Peterborough to re-build their parish church with, in a more convenient
situation. The eastern and western arches of the lantern must also have
been altered into their present shape about this time, and the first
story of a tower, which, if it had been completed, would have been one
of the finest in England, built upon them: this is now remaining, and
forms all the pretence that this Cathedral can show to a central
tower."

Ashton resigned in 1471, to the Bishop of Lincoln, and was succeeded by
William Ramsey, in the same year, who, with the assistance of prior
Maldon, erected a "brazen eagle" in the church, to which the bible and
mass book were chained. This eagle is now in the choir of the
Cathedral, and used when reading the lessons. Ashton was indicted[15] in
1480, for releasing a felon from the gaol at _Peterburgh_, and
accepting a bribe for the same. He was tried and convicted, and was
obliged to find sureties for better conduct. The original judgment is
yet retained in the chapter-house; with the names of the abbot's
sureties. He died in 1496, after a rule of 25 years.

Robert Kirton was made abbot in 1496. During his rule the regulations
of the monastery were in a measure broken up; many of the monks had
become disorderly and even licentious, and one of them robbed the
shrine of St. Oswald of a number of jewels, and other valuable
articles, for the purpose of paying a woman in the town the wages of
her prostitution. Others gave themselves up to bacchanalian riots in a
neighbouring tavern, and, instead of devoting their nights to "prayer,"
gave themselves up to the vulgar "company of dancers and ballad
singers."

These irregularities took place in the 19th year of this abbot's rule.
They were, however, speedily terminated by the Bishop of Lincoln, who,
hearing of such notorious infringements of the monastic rules, came in
person to restore those licentious members of the fraternity to their
duty.

Abbot Kirton had many contests with his tenants, "but notwithstanding,"
says Gunton, "he forgat not to enlarge and beautify his monastery, for
he built that goodly building at the east end of the church, now
commonly known by the name of the new building,"[16] wherein he placed
three altars, opposite three pair of stairs, descending from the back
of the great altar. He likewise built a chamber in the abbey house,
which is still called "heaven-gate chamber." He made also a beautiful
window in the great hall "overlooking the cloyster." He added many
pictures to those which were already in the chapel of St. Mary, or the
Lady's Chapel, as it is now called, all which have since been
destroyed. The gate that leads to the deanery is likewise of his
workmanship, and bears his signature in hieroglyphics, viz:--a Kirk,
and a tun under it. This gate is a magnificent specimen of
architecture, and should be seen by every person who visits
Peterborough. Abbot Kirton ruled nearly 32 years, and died in 1528.

John Chambers was the last abbot, and was elected in 1528.

Cardinal Wolsey visited the abbey in the 17th year of the reign of
Henry the Eighth, and washed and kissed the feet of fifty-nine poor
people, which ceremony was called "keeping his maundy." He then gave
them twelve pence, three ells of canvas, a pair of shoes, and divided a
barrel of red herrings amongst them: he likewise sang mass himself on
Easter-day, and absolved from their sins all those who heard him.

It was during the rule of Chambers that Queen Catherine, the first wife
of Henry the 8th, died [July 1, 1535], and was buried in the monastery.
Her tomb may be seen in the north side of the choir. The scaff which
covered her pall was originally deposited at the back of the great
altar. It was inwoven with silver, and was very massive and heavy.


      [7] This sum made the church dependent upon the monastery, and
      the chaplain was required to bring his church key to the sacrist
      of the monastery, yearly, as an acknowledgement of it.--_See
      Gunton's Hist. Church, Peterborough, p. 24._

      [8] Britton says "he founded a chapel to St. Nicholas _near_
      it;" but Gunton is doubtless correct, when he says that the
      chapel was over it.

      [9] After Acharius had recovered the marsh of Singlesholt from
      the Abbot of Crowland by the law of the land, he let it to him
      with the understanding that, instead of his paying four stones of
      wax to the Abbot of Crowland, the abbot should pay him a yearly
      rental in kind, of the same amount.

      [10] These decrees were, that all churches not consecrated with
      holy oil, should be dedicated within two years.--_See Britton's
      Hist. Cathedral Church, Peterborough, pp. 22-3._

      [11] There was at one time an entrance from the Choir into the
      Lady Chapel through a door, on the right side of which was a
      small oratory, with a stone roof; the remains are yet to be seen.

      [12] This hospital was afterwards called Spittle, and some of the
      stones are still remaining in Spittle-field. It was left by Agnes
      Pudding, with eight acres of arable land adjoining it.

      [13] The Prince at first refused the robe offered to him, because
      the abbot did not make a similar offer to his companion; Godfrey,
      however, soon settled the affair, by presenting one to each.

      [14] A gentleman in this city who is an excellent antiquarian,
      and has seen the corrody alluded to above, says, "It was granted
      by charter of the abbot, and presents many curiosities--mentioning
      particularly the abbot's wine cellar at the over end of the
      cloister, under the present passage into the square."--_Private
      MS._

      [15] The abbot was indicted at the sessions at _Peterburgh_
      before Guy Woolston.--_Private MS._

      [16] It is still commonly, but incorrectly, called The Lady
      Chapel. A building of corresponding position at Lincoln is called
      the Presbytry.




CHAPTER III.

_From the transformation of the monastery into a Cathedral during the
rule of abbot Chambers, in 1541, to the present time._


The dissolution of the religious houses of England is one of the most
important events recorded in our national history. It changed the whole
aspect of civil and ecclesiastical affairs, and produced an entire
revolution in the scheme of legislation.

John Chambers, who was the abbot of _Peterburgh_ before these changes
commenced, conformed to the new order of things, and was retained in
office by the king,--the monastery being converted into a cathedral,
and the abbot into a bishop. The new establishment consisted of a
Bishop, a Dean, and six canons; besides these the statutes directed
that there should be six Minor Canons chosen, among other good
qualifications, for their skill in singing, by whom the services in the
Cathedral, were to be conducted, according to the usage of the old
Cathedrals. Of these, one was to be chosen as Precentor, to whom the
other Minor Canons, the Organists, Lay Clerks, and Choristers, were to
be subordinate. The chancel of Thomas ¨¤ Becket's Chapel, already spoken
of, was then converted into a school-room, in which the Choristers, and
a certain number of other boys, were to receive a classical education
at the hands of one of the Minor Canons appointed, for his superior
learning, to the office of schoolmaster. Chambers governed 15 years in
his new office. There is some dispute amongst the historians of this
church about the time of his death, but it is generally agreed that the
tablet to his memory is dated wrong, and that he died in 1556. There
were two monuments erected to him, by his own orders, before his death;
and this circumstance may account for the error in the date upon the
tablets. One of the monuments was a beautifully executed statue of
himself, in white chalk, but it was destroyed in 1643. The bishop
adorned the doors of the church with carved images and hieroglyphics,
one of which at the west front represents a sinner tormented by devils,
though it is now much defaced.

From the death of Bishop Chambers to the accession of Richard Howland,
in 1584, nothing of importance occurred. It was during his rule that
the unhappy queen of Scots fell a victim to the vanity and jealousy of
Elizabeth, in the castle of Fotheringhay.[17]

"Although that unfortunate Queen had been executed on the 8th of
February, her body was not brought to Peterborough for burial till the
night of the thirtieth of July following, when it was conveyed by
torch-light from Fotheringhay Castle by Garter King at Arms, and other
Heralds, with a guard of horsemen, in a chariot made for the purpose,
covered with black cloth. The corpse was met at the entrance of the
cathedral by the bishop, Richard Howland, and Fletcher, the dean of the
cathedral, with others, who attended it in solemn procession to the
vault appointed for it, in which it was immediately deposited. The
vault was then covered, an opening merely being left through which the
Heralds might deposit their broken staves. No service was said at the
time, as it was agreed that it had better be done on the day fixed for
the solemnization of the funeral. On the day following, there came to
Peterborough all those persons of rank appointed to attend the funeral,
for whom a grand supper was prepared at the bishop's palace. On
Tuesday, the first of August, 1586, being the day fixed for the
funeral, they all marched in order to the church, the Countess of
Bedford being chief mourner. The funeral service was performed by the
Dean of Peterborough; the prebendaries and choir of the Cathedral then
sang an anthem, after which a sermon was preached by Wickham, Bishop of
Lincoln. The officers having broken their staves and cast them into the
vault, and the offerings appointed having been made to the Bishop and
Dean and Chapter of Peterborough, the nobility and officers, who had
attended the funeral, returned to the bishop's palace, where a
sumptuous repast was provided, after which they all returned to their
respective homes.

"The place where this queen was interred, is now marked by a marble slab
directly under the doorway leading from the choir into its south aisle.
Over this was erected a superb monument to her memory, which remained
perfect until the time of the great rebellion.

"After the queen's body had lain at Peterborough about 25 years, her
son, James I., wishing to have it removed to Westminster Abbey, wrote
to the Dean and Chapter of Peterborough, requesting them to allow of
the removal.[18] The corpse was accordingly taken from its grave at
Peterborough, and removed to the place where it now lies, at
Westminster, under the care of Richard Neile, Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, on October 11th, 1612."

The next event of public interest happened during the bishopric of John
Towers, in 1643; namely, the destruction and defacement of all the
monuments and ornamental pictures of the cathedral, through the foolish
prejudices and blinded bigotry of the puritanical followers of
Cromwell, who destroyed every thing valuable within it, and spread
terror over the surrounding country. The stately front, the curious
altar-piece, and beautiful cloister, for which the cathedral was
remarkable, were defaced and injured by them as they passed through the
city, on their way to Croyland, which they were going to besiege, it
having declared in favour of the king. To reduce that town, the
Parliamentarian forces marched through Peterborough about the middle of
the month of April. The first regiment that came did no harm to the
church, for, being commanded by one Hubbart, who seems to have been a
great improvement upon the puritanical leaders of that time, the
soldiers received orders, in no way to injure the Cathedral. But
unfortunately, about two days after, a regiment of horse arrived,
commanded by Colonel Cromwell; and these men the morning after their
arrival, commenced the work of destruction. They broke open the doors
of the church, demolished the monuments, and turned the building into a
stable.

The fury of Cromwell's soldiers is thus described in an old paper
called:--

"_A short and true narrative of the Rising and Defacing the Cathedral
Church of Peterborough, in the year 1643._"

"The next day after their arrival, early in the morning, they break
open the church doors, pull down the organs, of which there were two
pair. The greater pair which stood upon a high loft over the entrance
into the quire, was thence thrown down upon the ground, and then
stamped and trampled on, and broke in pieces.

"Then the souldiers entered the quire, and their first business was to
tear in pieces all the common prayer books that could be found. The
great bible indeed, that lay upon a brass eagle for reading the
lessons, had the good hap to escape with the loss only of the
apocrypha.

"Next they break down all the seats, stalls and wainscots that was
behind them, being adorned with several historical passages out of the
old testament, a latin distich being in each seat to declare the story.
Whilst they were thus employed, they happened to find a great parchment
book, behind the ceiling, with some twenty pieces of gold laid there,
by a person a little before.--This encourages the souldiers in their
work, and makes them the more eager in breaking down all the rest of
the wainscot. The book was called 'Swapham,' and was afterwards
redeemed by a person belonging to the minster for ten shillings.[19]

"There was also a great brass candlestick hanging in the middle of the
quire, containing a dozen and a half of lights, with another bow
candlestick about the brass eagle. These both were broke in pieces, and
most of the brass carried away and sold.

"A well disposed person standing by and seeing the souldiers make such
spoil speaks to an officer, desiring him to restrain them; who
answered, '_See how these poor people are concerned to see their
idols pulled down_.'

"When they had thus defaced and spoiled the quire, they made up next to
the east end of the church, and there break and cut in pieces, and
afterwards burn the rails that were about the communion table. The
table itself was thrown down, the table cloth taken away, with two fair
books in velvet covers; the one a bible, the other a common prayer
book, with a silver basin gilt, and a pair of silver candlesticks
beside. But upon request made to Colonel Hubbert, the books, bason, and
all else, save the candlesticks, were restored again.

"Not long after, on the 13th day of July, 1643, Captain Barton and
Captain Hope, two martial ministers of Nottingham or Darbyshire, coming
to Peterburgh, break open the vestry, and take away a fair crimson
satten table cloth, and several other things, that had escaped the
former souldiers hands.

"Now behind the communion table there stood a curious piece of
stone-work, admired much by strangers and travellers: a stately skreen
it was, well wrought, painted and gilt, which rose up as high almost as
the roof of the church, in a row of three lofty spires, with other
lesser spires growing out of each of them. This now had no imagery work
upon it, or any thing else that might justly give offence, and yet
because it bore the name of the high altar,[20] was pulled all down with
ropes, lay'd low and level with the ground.

"Over this place, in the roof of the church, in a large oval yet to be
seen, was the picture of Our Saviour seated on a throne; one hand
erect, and holding a globe in the other, attended with the four
evangelists, and saints on each side, with crowns in their hands,
intended, I suppose, for a representation of Our Saviour's coming to
judgment. Some of the company espying this, cry out and say, 'Lo, this
is the God these people bow and cringe unto; this is the idol they
worship and adore.' Hereupon several souldiers charged their muskets,
(amongst whom one Daniel Wood, of Captain Roper's company was the
chief) and discharge them at it: and by the many shots they made, at
length do quite deface and spoil [the] picture.

"The odiousness of this act gave occasion (I suppose) to a common fame,
very rife at that time, and whence _Mercurius Rusticus_ might have his
relation, viz.:--that divine vengeance had signally seized on some of
the principal actors; that one was struck blind upon the place; by a
rebound of his bullet; that another dyed mad a little after, neither of
which I can certainly attest. For, though I have made it my business to
enquire of this, I could never find any other judgment befal them then,
but that of a mad blind zeal, wherewith these persons were certainly
possest.

"Then they rob and rifle the tombs, and violate the monuments of the
dead. And where should they first begin, but with those of the two
queens, who had been there interr'd: the one on the north side, the
other on the south side of the church, both near unto the altar. First
then they demolished Queen Katherin's tomb, Henry the Eighth his
repudiated wife: they break down the rails that enclosed the place, and
take away the black velvet pall which covered the herse,--overthrow the
herse itself, displaced the gravestone that lay over her body, and have
left nothing now remaining of that tomb, but only a monument of their
own shame and villany. The like they had certainly done to the Queen of
Scots, but that her herse and pall were removed with her body to
Westminster by King James the First, when he came to the crown. But
what did remain they served in like manner; that is, her royal arms and
escutcheons, which hung upon a pillar, near the place where she had
been interr'd [which] were most rudely pulled down, defaced and torn.

"In the north isle of the church there was a stately tomb in memory of
Bishop Dove, who had been thirty years bishop of the place. He lay
there in portraicture in his episcopal robes, on a large bed under a
fair table of black marble, with a library of books about him. These
men that were such enemies to the name and office of a bishop, and much
more to his person, hack and hew the poor innocent statue in pieces,
and soon destroy'd all the tomb. So that in a short space, all that
fair and curious monument was buried in its own rubbish and ruines.

"The like they do to two other monuments standing in that isle; the one
the tomb of Mr. Worm, the other of Dr. Angier, who had been prebendary
of that church.

"In a place then called the new building, and since converted to a
library, there was a fair monument, which Sir Humphrey Orm (to save his
heir that charge and trouble), thought fit to erect in his own life
time, where he and his lady, his son and wife and all their children,
were lively represented in statues, under which were certain English
verses written:--

    _"Mistake not, reader, I thee crave,_
    _This is an altar not a grave,_
    _Where fire raked up in ashes lyes,_
    _And hearts are made the sacrifice, &c._

"Which two words, altar and sacrifice, 'tis said, did so provoke and
kindle the zealots indignation, that they resolve to make the tomb
itself a sacrifice: and with axes, poleaxes, and hammers, destroy and
break down all that curious monument, save only two pilasters still
remaining, which shew and testifie the elegancy of the rest of the
work. Thus it hapned, that the good old knight who was a constant
frequenter of Gods publick service, three times a day, outlived his own
monument, and lived to see himself carried in effigie on a souldiers
back, to the publick market-place, there to be sported withall, a crew
of souldiers going before in procession, some with surplices, some with
organ pipes, to make up the solemnity.

"When they had thus demolished the chief monuments, at length the very
gravestones and marbles on the floor did not escape their sacrilegious
hands. For where there was any thing on them of sculptures or
inscriptions in brass, these they force and tear off. So that whereas
there were many fair pieces of this kind before, as that of abbot
William of Ramsey, whose large marble gravestone was plated over with
brass, and several others the like, there is not any such now in all
the church to be seen; though most of the inscriptions that were upon
them are preserved in this book.

"One thing, indeed, I must needs clear the souldiers of, which
_Mercurius Rusticus_ upon misinformation charges them with, viz.:--That
they took away the bell clappers and sold them, with the brass they
plucked off from the tombs. The mistake was this: the neighbourhood
being continually disturbed with the souldiers jangling and ringing the
bells auker, as though there had been a scare-fire, (though there was
no other, but what they themselves had made,) some of the inhabitants
by night took away the clappers and hid them in the roof of the church,
on purpose only to free their ears from that confused noise; which gave
occasion to such as did not know it, to think the souldiers had stolen
them away.

"Having thus done their work on the floor below, they are now at
leasure to look up to the windows above, which would have entertained
any persons else with great delight and satisfaction, but only such
zealots as these, whose eyes were so dazzled, that they thought they
saw popery in every picture and piece of painted glass.

"Now the windows of this church were very fair, and had much curiosity
of workmanship in them, being adorned and beautified with several
historical passages out of scripture, and ecclesiastical story; such
were those in the body of the church, in the isles, in the new
building, and elsewhere. But the cloister windows were most famed of
all for their great art and pleasing variety. One side of the
quadrangle containing the history of the Old Testament; another, that
of the new; a third, a history from the first foundation of the
Monastery of King Peada to the restoring of it by King Edgar; a fourth,
all the kings of England downwards from the first Saxon king. All which
notwithstanding were most shamefully broken and destroyed."

[But little remains to be seen of these famous cloisters beyond the
mouldings of arches imposed in rough walls on each side. The five
recesses in the south wall were partly the lavatories used by the Monks
before entering the refectory by the richly cut door in the corner.]

_"Every window had at the bottom the explanation of the history thus
in verse:_--

    _First Window._

    COL. 1.

    "King Penda, a paynim, as writing seyth,
    "'Gate yese five children of Christen feyth."

    COL. 2.

    "The noble Peada, by God's grace,
    "Was the first founder of this place."

    COL. 3.

    "By Queen Ermenyld, had King Wulfere,
    "These twey sons that ye see here."

    COL. 4.

    "Wulfade rideth, as he was wont,
    "Into the forest, the hart to hunt."


    _Second Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Fro' all his men Wulfade is gone,
    "And 'suyth himself the hart alone."[21]

    COL. 2.

    "The hart brought Wulfade to a well,
    "That was beside Seynt Chaddy's cell."

    COL. 3.

    "Wulfade askyd of Seynt Chad,--
    "Where is the hart that me hath lad."

    COL. 4.

    "The hart that hither thee hath brought,
    "Is sent by Christ, that thee hath bought."


    _Third Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Wulfade prayd Chad, that ghostly leech,
    "The feyth of Christ him for to teach."

    COL. 2.

    "Seynt Chad teacheth Wulfade the feyth,
    "And words of baptism over him he seyth."

    COL. 3.

    "Seynt Chad devoutly to mass him dight,
    "And hoseled Wulfade Christy's knight."

    COL. 4.

    "Wulfade wished Seynt Chad, that day,
    "For his brother Rufine to pray."


    _Fourth Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Wulfade told his brother Rufine
    "That he was christned by Chaddy's doctrine."

    COL. 2.

    "Rufine to Wulfade said again,--
    "Christned also would I be fain."

    COL. 3.

    "Wulfade, Rufine to Seynt Chad leadeth,
    "And Chad with love of feyth him feedeth."

    COL. 4.

    "Rufine is christned, of Seynt Chaddys,
    "And Wulfade, his brother, his godfather is."


    _Fifth Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Werbode, steward to King Wulfere,
    "Told that his sons christned were."

    COL. 2.

    "Towards the chappel Wulfere 'gan goe,
    "By guiding of Werbode, Christy's foe."

    COL. 3.

    "Into the chappel entred the King,
    "And found his sons worshipping."

    COL. 4.

    "Wulfere in woodness his sword out drew,
    "And both his sons anon he slew."[22]


    _Sixth Window._

    COL. 1.

    "King Wulfere, with Werbode yoo,
    "Burying gave his sons two."

    COL. 2.

    "Werbode for vengeance his own flesh tare,
    "The devil him strangled, and to hell bare."

    COL. 3.

    "Wulfere, for sorrow, anon was sick,
    "In bed he lay, a dead man like."

    COL. 4.

    "Seynt Ermenyld, that blessed Queen,
    "Counselled Wulfere to shrive him clean."


    _Seventh Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Wulfere contrite, hyed him to Chad,
    "As Ermenyld him counselled had"[23]

    COL. 2.

    "Chad bade Wulfere, for his sin,
    "Abbeys to build his realm within."

    COL. 3.

    "Wulfere in haste performed than,
    "Brough that Peada his brother began."

    COL. 4.

    "Wulfere endued with high devotion,
    "The abbey of Brough with great possession."


    _Eighth Window._

    COL. 1.

    "The third brother, King Ethelred,
    "Confirmed both his brethren's deed."

    COL. 2.

    "Saxulf, that here first abbot was,
    "For Ankery's, at Thorney, made a place."

    COL. 3.

    "After came Danes, and Brough brent,
    "And slew the Monkys as they went."

    COL. 4.

    "Fourscore years and sixteen,
    "Stood Brough destroyed by Danes teen."


    _Ninth Window._

    COL. 1.

    "Seynt Athelwold was bidden by God's lore,
    "The abbey of Brough again to restore."

    COL. 2.

    "Seynt Athelwold to King Edgar went,
    "And prayed him to help him in his intent."

    COL. 3.

    "Edgar bade Athelwold the work begin,
    "And him to help he would not lyn."

    COL. 4.

    "Thus Edgar and Athelwold restored this place,
    "God save it and keep it for his grace."[24]

"But to proceed, notwithstanding all the art and curiosity of
workmanship these windows did afford, yet nothing of all this could
oblige the reforming rabble, but they deface and break them all in
pieces, in the church and in the cloyster, and left nothing
undemolisht, where either any picture or painted glass did appear;
excepting only part of the great west window in the body of the church,
which still remains entire, being too high for them, and out of their
reach. Yea, to encourage them the more in this trade of breaking and
battering windows down, Cromwell himself, (as 'twas reported,) espying
a little crucifix in a window aloft, which none, perhaps, before had
scarce observed, gets a ladder, and breaks it down zealously with his
own hand.

"But before I conclude the narrative, I must not forget to tell, how
they likwise broke open the chapterhouse, ransack'd the records, broke
the seals, tore the writings in pieces, specially such as had great
seals annexed unto them, which they took or mistook rather for the
popes bulls. So that a grave and sober person coming into the room at
the time, finds the floor all strewed and covered over with torn
papers, parchments and broken seals; and being astonisht at this sight,
does thus expostulate with them. Gentlemen, (says he,) what are ye
doing? they answered, we are pulling and tearing the popes bulls in
pieces. He replies, ye are much mistaken: for these writings are
neither the popes bulls, nor any thing relating to him. But they are
the evidences of several mens estates, and in destroying these, you
will destroy and undo many. With these they were something perswaded,
and prevailed upon by the same person, to permit him to carry away all
that were left undefaced, by which means, the writings the church hath
now came to be preserved.

"Such was the souldiers carriage and behaviour all the time during
their stay at Peterburgh, which was a fortnights space: They went to
church duly, but it was only to do mischief, to break and batter the
windows and any carved work that was yet remaining, or to pull down
crosses wheresoever they could find them; which the first founders did
not set up with so much zeal, as these last confounders pulled them
down.

"Thus, in a short time, a fair and goodly structure was quite stript of
all its ornamental beauty, and made a ruthful spectacle, a very chaos
of desolation and confusion, nothing scarce remaining but only bare
walls, broken seats, and shatter'd windows on every side.

"And in the time of this publick confusion, two other things hapned not
unworthy of relating: the one for the strangeness, the other for the
sadness of the accident. The first was this, when now the church lay
open to all comers, without locks and bars, and none to look after
them, those specially that lead up to the leads above; two young
children not above five years old, had got up the steeple by
themselves, and having lost their way down, come to the place where the
great bells hang. Here there was a large round space left purposely in
the arch, when first built, for the drawing up bells or any other
things, as there should be occasion. This place used to be safely
closed before, but now it lay wide open, and was between thirty and
forty yards off from the ground. The two children, coming hither and
finding this passage, one, out of his childish simplicity, was for
jumping down: No, (saies the other) let us rather swarm down, there
being a bell rope then hanging down through that place to the
clockhouse below. Now, this last they did, and a gentleman walking
there beneath at that time, sees two children come with that swiftness
down the rope, like arrows from a bow, who were both taken up for dead,
on the place. This hapned on a Sunday ith' afternoon, in sermon time.
The news coming into the parish church, that two children falling off
from the minster were slain, the congregation were exceedingly
disorder'd, so that the preacher could not go on for a time, every
parent fearing it might be their own childrens case; till at length
they understood the truth and certainty of all. For it pleased God by a
strange and wonderful providence to preserve both these children,
having no hurt but only their hands galled by the rope, and their feet
a little stunted by the fall from the clock-house, where they were
thrown off, the rope being fastened there, and this some four or five
yards high. The persons, I suppose, are both living still; and one of
them, (whose father was then one of the chief tradesmen of the town)
since a grave minister, and rector of a parish in Northamptonshire.

"The other thing that hapned of more fatal consequences was this:--it
being that time of the year when young lads are busie in rifling
jackdaws nests to get their young, a scholar of the free-school, a son
to a parliament officer, was got upon the top of the minster about this
employment; who going along the cieling in the body of the church, and
treading unwarily on some rotten boards, fell down from thence, upon
the loft where the organ now stands, having his pockets filled with
those inauspicious birds, and with the fall from so great a height, was
slain outright and never stirred more.

"These two things hapned much about the same time, and in the time of
that publick confusion and disorder. But to proceed in our intended
narrative. These things I have related before were indeed the acts of
private persons only, men of wild intemperate zeal, and who had no
commission for what they did, but what was owing to the swords by their
sides. Yet notwithstanding all these things seemed afterwards to be
own'd and approved by the powers then in being, when they sold all the
churches lands, and many fair buildings adjoyning to the minster, were
likewise pulled down and sold by publick order and authority, such were
the cloysters, the old chapter-house, the library, the bishops hall and
chapel at the end of it: the hall was as fair a room as most in
England; and another call'd the green chamber, not much inferior to it.
These all were then pull'd down and destroyed; and the materials, lead,
timber, and stone exposed to sale, for any that would buy them. But
some of the bargains proved not very prosperous; the lead especially
that came off the palace, was as fatal as the gold of Tholouse; for to
my knowledge, the merchant that bought it, lost it all, and the ship
which carried it, in her voyage to Holland.

"And thus the church continued ruined and desolate, and without all
divine offices for a time; till at length by the favour of a great
person in the neighbourhood, it was repaired and restored to some
degrees of decency again; and out of the ashes of a late cathedral,
grew up into a new parochial church, in which way it was employ'd and
used ever after, untill the kings happy restauration. For Mr. Oliver
St. John, chief justice then of the common pleas, being sent on an
embassy into Holland by the powers that governed then, requested this
boon of them at his return, that they would give him the ruin'd church
or minster at Peterburgh; this they did accordingly, and he gave it to
the town of Peterburgh for their use, to be employ'd as a parochial
church, their own parish church being then very ruinous and gone to
decay.

"Now the town considering the largeness of the building, and the
greatness of the charge to repair it, which of themselves they were not
able to defray, they all agree to pull down the ladies chapel as it was
then called, an additional building to the north side of the minster,
(being then ruinous and ready to fall) and to expose the materials
thereof, lead, timber, and stone to sale, and to convert the mony that
was made of them, towards the repairs of the great fabrick.

"All this they did, and appointed certain persons to oversee the work,
and expended several summs thus in repairs, mending the leads, securing
the roof, glazing several windows, and then fitting up the quire, and
making it pretty decent for the congregation to meet in. And this they
did, by taking the painted boards that came off from the roof of the
ladies chapel, and placing them all along at the back of the quire, in
such manner as they continue to this day.

"When the place was thus fitted up, and the devastations which the
souldiers had made in some measure repaired, one Mr. Samuel Wilson,
school master of the charter-house, in London, was sent down by the
committee of plundred ministers, as they were then called, to be
preacher, with a sallary of 160_l._ per an. in which employment he
continued untill the kings return. Then Dr. Cofin, the antient dean of
the church, after almost twenty years exile in France, return'd and
re-assumed his right again, in the year 1660, about the end of July. He
then after so long an interval renew'd the antient usage, and read
divine service first himself, and caused it to be read every day
afterward, according to the laudable use and custome, and settled the
church and quire in that order wherein it now continues.

"But though the church was thus delivered from public robbers and
spoilers, yet it was not safe from the injuries of private hands. For
some ten or twelve years after, certain thieves in the dead of the
night, broke into the church and stole away all the plate they could
find, viz.: a fair silver bason gilt, and the virgers two silver rods,
and a linnen table-cloth to wrap them in, which were never heard of to
this day. This was the same bason that had been plunder'd by the
souldiers, and recovered again, but irrecoverably lost now. Yet both
these losses were soon repaired, one by Dr. Henshaw, bishop then of the
place, who gave a fair new silver basin gilt; the other made up by Dr.
Duport, then dean, who furnisht the virgers again with the ensigns of
their office, by buying two new silver maces for the churches use.

"And thus is this history brought down at length within our own
knowledge and remembrance; where we have seen what various fortunes
this antient church has had, which now reckons at least one thousand
years from its first foundation. It has been often ruinated, and as
often re-edified. Once it was destroyed by Danes; twice consumed by
fire; it escaped the general downfal of abbies, in Hen. the Eighth's
time, though not without the loss of some of her fairest manners; and
yet what that king took away in revenues, he added to it in dignity, by
converting it from an abbey into a cathedral church. But the worst
mischief that ever befel it, was that in the late rebellious times,
when the church itself was miserably defaced and spoiled; and all the
lands for the maintenance thereof, quite alienated and sold. And yet
through Gods especial goodness and favour, we have lived to see the one
repaired, the others restored, and the church itself recovering her
antient beauty and lustre again. And that it may thus long continue,
flourish and prosper, and be a nursery for vertue, a seminary for true
religion and piety, a constant preserver of Gods publick worship and
service, and free from all sacrilegious hands, is the earnest and
hearty prayer wherewith I shall conclude this discourse."


      [17] Sir William Fitzwilliam, of Milton, to whom the castle then
      belonged, used to pay visits to the queen of Scots during her
      confinement, and his noble and gentlemanly conduct, secured the
      good esteem of Mary. At a later period, a little before the queen
      was executed, she presented him with a picture of her son, as a
      testimony of the value which she set upon his friendship. This
      picture is now in the possession of the Fitzwilliam family.

      [18] The original letter, in the king's own hand-writing, is
      still in the possession of the Dean and Chapter of Peterborough,
      and has recently been placed in a frame by the entrance from the
      south aisle. The following is a copy:--"JAMES R. Trusty and
      wel-beloved, wee greet you well, for that wee remember it
      appertaynes to ye duty wee owe to our dearest mother that like
      honour should be done to hir body and like monument be extant of
      hir as to others, hirs and our progenitors have bene used to be
      done, and ourselves have already performed to our deare sister ye
      late Queen Elizabeth. Wee have commanded a Memoriall of hir to be
      made in our church of Westminster, ye place where ye Kings and
      Queens of this realme are usually interred. And for that wee
      thinke it inconvenient that ye monument and hir body should be in
      severall places, we have ordered that hir said body remayning now
      interred in that our Cathedrall Church of Peterborough shalbe
      removed to Westminster to hir said monument; and have committed
      ye care and chardg of ye said translation of hir body from
      Peterborough to Westminster to ye reverend father in God our
      right trusty and wel beloved servant ye Bishop of Coventry and
      Lichfield, bearer hereof, to whom wee require you (or to such as
      ye shall assigne) to deliver ye corps of our said deceased
      mother, ye same being taken up in a decent and respectfull manner
      as is fitting. And for that there is a pall now upon ye hearse
      over hir grave which wilbe requisite to be used to cover hir said
      body in ye removing thereof, which may perhapps be deemed as a
      ffee that should belong to ye church. We have appointed ye said
      reverend father to pay you a reasonable redemption for ye same,
      which being done by him wee require you that he may have ye pall
      to be used for ye purpose aforesaid. Given under our signet at
      our Honor of Hampton Court ye eight and twentieth day of
      September in ye tenth yeare of our reigne of England, France and
      Ireland, and of Scotland ye six and fortieth. To our trusty and
      welbeloved ye Dean and Chapter of our Cathedrall Church of
      Peterborough, and in theire absence to ye right reverend father
      in God ye Bishop of Peterborough and to such of ye Prebends or
      other officers of that church as shalbe found being there."

      [19] This ancient record is said to have been written about the
      year 1217, by a monk named Hugh Candidus. It is a MS. account of
      the History of the Abbey from its foundation. Dean Patrick gives
      the following account of its singular preservation:--"One book
      indeed, and but one, still remains, which was happily redeemed
      from the fire by the then precentor of the church, Mr. Humfrey
      Austin, who knowing the great value of it, first hid it, in
      February, 1642, under a seat in the quire: and when it was found
      by a soldier on the twenty-second of April, 1643 (when all the
      seats were pulled down), rescued it again by the offer of ten
      shillings, 'for that old latin bible' as he called it, and about
      which he pretended to enquire. The name of the bible by the help
      of the ten shillings, preserved this precious treasure from the
      flames, whither it was going, as Mr. Austin hath left a record in
      the beginning of the book; with a copy of the soldier's
      acknowledgement:--'_This booke was hide in the Church by me
      Humphrey Austin; February, 1642. And found by one of Coll.
      Cromwelle souldyers when they pul'd down all the seats in the
      quire, April 22th, 1643. And I makeing inquirie amongst them for
      an old Latin Bible which were lost, I found out at last the
      partie who had it, and I gave him for the booke tenn shillings as
      you see by this acquittance.... The coppie of his acquittance:--I
      pray let this Scripture Book alone, for he hath paid me for it,
      and therefore I would desire you to let it alone. By me HENRY
      TOPCLIFFE, souldyer under Captain Cromwell, Colonel Cromwell's
      sonn; therefore I pray let it alone._--By me Henry Topcliffe.'"
      This Ancient Manuscript book is now kept with other documents in
      the Chapter house of the Cathedral.

      [20] Dean Patrick, in his supplement to _Gunton's History of
      the Cathedral_, says it was famous for three things, "a
      stately front, a curious altar piece, and a beautiful cloister."
      Mr. Davys, in his _Guide_, also says, "we learn, from other
      writings, that the stall-work, in its choir, was remarkably
      fine, that its windows of painted glass were of a most superb
      description, and that, in the number, and beauty of its monuments
      and brasses, it excelled most of the other churches of the realm.
      Its central tower, though then in an incomplete state, was much
      finer than it now is, as it had a handsome octagon above what now
      forms the central tower. The north western transept tower was
      also adorned with a lofty spire. This spire, which was of wood
      covered with lead, was taken down soon after this time."

      [21] "Wulfade was much addicted to hunting, and one day pursuing
      a goodly hart, which being hotly pursued, took soil in a fountain
      near unto the cell of St. Chad, who espying the hart weary, and
      almost spent, was so compassionate towards him that he covered
      him with boughs and leaves, conjecturing, as if heaven had some
      design in the access and deportment of that beast. Presently
      comes Prince Wulfade, and enquired of St. Chad concerning the
      hart, who answered, That he was not a keeper of beasts, but the
      souls of men, and that Wulfade was then, as an hart to the water
      brooks, sent by God to the fountain of living water: which
      Wulfade hearing with astonishment, entered into further
      conference with St. Chad in his cell, and was by him baptized:
      and returning with joy to his father's court, he secretly told
      his brother Rufine of all that had passed, perswading him to be
      baptized also; to which Rufine consenting, Wulfade brought him to
      St. Chad, who likewise baptized this other brother."

      [22] "This Christian pair of brothers did often resort to a
      private oratory, where they performed their devotions; but at
      length being discovered to their father by the steward Werbode,
      who instigated, and enflamed the fire of paternal fury against
      the sons, King Wolfere, the father, watching the time when his
      sons were gone to pray, followed them, and entering the oratory,
      slew both his sons with his own hand; and he, and Werbode
      demolishing the place, left the bodies of his sons buried in the
      rubbish." "Queen Ermenild, having searched for the bodies of her
      sons, found them out, and giving them burial, [in one stone
      coffin,] built in the same place where they were slain, a church
      of stone."

      [23] Dean Kipling, on the authority of tradition, is of opinion,
      that St. Chad's well was in the quadrangle on the south side of
      the minster, called the laurel court; but Gunton says, "St. Chad
      had his cell in the county of Stafford, was the first bishop of
      Lichfield, where he founded the cathedral church, and there lieth
      buried." And this assertion would appear to be born out by the
      fact that the "church of stone" referred to in the previous note,
      is known to have been erected at _Stone_, in Staffordshire.

      [24] The present painted windows are of modern date, excepting
      one or two, which are composed of fragments of the windows of the
      cloisters above described.


